ASCAL
==========

A simulation environment to analyze different autoscaling algorithms of containers and nodes.

Introduction
------------

ASCAL is a Python package that simulates different autoscaling algorithms focusing on minimizing costs in Container as a
Service (CaaS) deployed on Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) clouds.
It applies to CPU-bounded applications.

 The following autoscaling algorithms are implemented:
- HA. Reactive and horizontal autoscaling of containers and nodes. It implements HPA (Horizontal Pod Autoscaler) and CA (Cluster Autoscaler) concepts of Kubernetes autoscalers.
- RHUA. Reactive history unaware autoscaling of containers and nodes. FCMA algorithms (https://github.com/asi-uniovi/fcma) are used to calculate near-optimal allocations in terms of cost at periodic times, called Fixed Deployment Windows (FDWs). The transition between two consecutive FDWs relies on optimizing the recycling of containers and nodes.
- PHUA. Predictive history unaware autoscaling of containers and nodes. Analogous to the previous one, but assuming a perfect load prediction. Time is divided into prediction windows, where application loads at a given percentile are known in advance.
- M-HA-RHUA. Mixed reactive horizontal autoscaling and reactive history unaware autoscaling. It combines the HA and RHUA autoscalers. It periodically readjusts with RHUA the deployment generated by the HA algorithm.
- M-HA-RHUA. Mixed reactive horizontal autoscaling and predictive history unaware autoscaling. It combines the HA and RHUA autoscalers. It periodically readjusts with PHUA the deployment generated by the HA algorithm.

Inputs:

- A set of applications.
- Application's workload measured in req/s (requests per second).
- A familiy of instance classes. Currently, ASCAL works with a single instance class family. For example, AWS C5, M5 and R5 family of instance classes. A family is made up of 
instance classes with identical performance per core, assuming there is enough memory 
to run the applications. An example of family definitions can be found in file 
[aws_eu_west_1.py](examples/aws_eu_west_1.py). In that file, AWS c5, AWS m5 and AWS r5 
instances have the same performance per core for any application. The instances differ in the number of cores
and memory, but the cost per core and memory is constant. 
File [aws_eu_west_1.py](examples/aws_eu_west_1.py) can be used as a reference to create
new instance class families.
- Autoscaler characterization.

Outputs:

- Application performances.
- System cost.

Installation
------------

Clone the repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/asi-uniovi/ascal.git
cd ascal
```

Install `uv` ([instructions](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/))

Synchronize the packages with uv:

```bash
uv sync
```

`uv` will create a local virtual environment in the `.venv` folder, and install there `ascal` in editable mode, and all the required dependencies. You can manually activate this virtual environment, but it is not required if you run the python scripts via `uv`, with the command `uv run <script>`.


Usage
-----
[An example](examples/ex1/ex1.py) of usage can be found in the
[examples](examples) folder, which can be run with:

```bash
cd examples/ex1
uv run ex1.py
```
A jupyter notebook with the same example can be found in _examples/ex1/ex1.ipynb_.

If order to use the package in your own code, the scheme provided in the example can be followed. 

**1. Write the required imports.**
```python
from ascal import AscalConfig, Ascal
from examples import aws_eu_west_1_c5m5r5
```

Module `aws_eu_west_1_c5m5r5` defines the cost, cores and GiB of AWS's C5, M5 and R5 instances and can be used as a reference to define new instance class families.

**3. Set the ASCAL configuration.**
```python
ascal_config = AscalConfig.get_from_config_yaml(config_file, aws_eu_west_1_c5m5r5.c5_m5_r5_fm)
```
Argument _config_file_ is a YAML with ASCAL's configuration.
Argument _aws_eu_west_1_c5m5r5.c5_m5_r5_fm_ is the instance class family. File contains child families _c5_, _m5_ and _r5_, which can be used to restrict the type of nodes used by the autoscaler.

**4. Create an ASCAL simulation**
```python
ascal_problem = Ascal(ascal_config, log=log_file)
```
The second argument is an optional log file. Log is disabled when it is not set.

**5. Execute an ASCAL simulation.**
```python
ascal_problem.run()
```
Simulate until the number of specified simulation units. In the example it simulates until the end, defined by the length of application's workloads. The simulation unit is 1 second.

**6. Generate CSV files with workloads and simulation results.**
```python
ascal_problem.write_workload_csv('workloads.csv')
ascal_problem.write_performance_csv('performances.csv')
ascal_problem.write_cost_csv('cost.csv')
```
**7. Optional plot of workloads and simulation results.**
```python
ascal_problem.plot(ascal_problem.get_workloads(), "Application Workloads", "req/s")
ascal_problem.plot(ascal_problem.get_performances(), "Application Performances", "req/s")
cluster_cost = ascal_problem.get_cluster_cost()
total_cost_str = f"total cost = {sum(cluster_cost)/3600:.3f} $"
ascal_problem.plot({total_cost_str: cluster_cost}, "Cluster Cost", "$/hour")
```

YAML Configuration file
-----------------------
ASCAL simulation can be configured through a YAML configuration file.
It is divided into three sectuons:
- Autoscalers.
- Timings.
- Applications.
- Simulation time.

 An example can be found in file _examples/ex1/config.yaml_, which is described below.

**1. Autoscalers.**
```yaml
autoscalers:
  h_reactive:
    time_period: 60 # Seconds
    desired_cpu_utilization: 0.7
    node_utilization_threshold: 0.5
    replica_scale_down_stabilization_time: 300
    node_scale_down_stabilization_time: 600
    aggs: 2

```
One or more autoscalers can be defined, although only one will be used. _h_reactive_ autoscaler corresponds to the HA, i.e., the reactive and horizontal autoscaler. This autoscaler wakes every _time_period_ and creates/removes containers/nodes. For each application, the number of container replicas is adjusted to obtain the _desired_cpu_utilization_, using the same ideas behind HPA in Kubernetes. If more replicas are required and they can not be allocated in the current nodes, new nodes are created using the minimum number of nodes but optimizing the cost. For example, if two c5.xlarge nodes are required to allocate the new containers, a single c5.2xlarge node is used instead, which provides the same computational resources at the same cost, but with less fragmentation (which helps in the allocation process). The removal of application replicas can not start before _replica_scale_down_stabilization_time_ seconds from the last time the number increased.

When CPU utilization is below the _node_utilization_threshold_ they are elegible to be removed. A simulation process analogous to tha performed by CA in Kubernetes is carried out, trying to move all its containers in other nodes. If the movement is successful, then the node is removed. Node removals are not tried until _node_scale_down_stabilization_time_ seconds have elapsed from the last node creations.

Unlike what happens with HPA in Kubernetes, this autoscaler is able to work with different sizes of containers in terms of CPU cores for the same application. Each application defines a minimum-size container and a set aggregations that multiply the CPU cores and performance, while the memory remains constant. Property _aggs: 2_ indicates that all the applications use aggregation 2 (double CPU cores and performance), but other settings are possible, such as _{app0: [1, 2], app1: 2}_.

``` yaml
  hv_reactive: 
    time_period: 60 # Seconds
    desired_cpu_utilization: 0.7
    algorithm: fcma 
    transition_time_budget: 100 # Seconds
    hot_node_scale_up: False
```
_hv_reactive_ autoscaler corresponds to the RHUA, i.e., the reactive and history unaware autoscaler. This autoscaler wakes every _time_period_, also named scheduling window, and creates/removes containers/nodes of different sizes. For each application, the total performance of its container replicas is adjusted to obtain the _desired_cpu_utilization_.  Just like with the horizontal autoscaler scaler, a value lower than one is necessary to handle temporary overloads, or those caused by the delay between requesting the creation of a node and the moment the node becomes available.
_hot_node_scale_up_ enables hot node upgrade withn the same instance class family.

A new deployment of containers and node is calculated at every time period using the specified algorithm. Currently there are three avaliable algorithms: _fcma1_, _fcma2_ and _fcma3_, in order of decreasing cost, but increasing calculation time.

Transitioning between two consecutive scheduling windows requires a sequence of creations/removals of containers of nodes. Property _transition_time_budget_ provides a budget for the transition algorithm, but the actual time to perform the transition may be higher when the value is too small a ned nodes need to be created.
Setting this parameter to zero uses a simple transition algorithm that tries to minimize the transition time.

``` yaml
hv_predictive: 
    prediction_window: 240 # Seconds
    prediction_percentile: 95 # Percentage 
    algorithm: fcma 
    transition_time_budget: 200 # Seconds
    hot-node-scale-up: True
```
_hv_predictive_ autoscaler corresponds to the PHUA, i.e., the predictive and history unaware autoscaler. This autoscaler wakes every _prediction_window_, and creates/removes containers/nodes of different sizes. 

At the current prediction window, application's workload load (for the given percentile) is assumed to be known for the next prediction window. This workload is used to calculate a new deployment for the next prediction window using the provided algorithm (_fcma_ in the example). Two transitions are scheduled, one that completes before the end of the current prediction window, for those applications with increased workload, and another that completes just at the beginning of the next prediction windod, for those applications with decreased workload.

Property _transition_time_budget_ is the total time available to perform the two transitions, but note again, that the actual time may be higher.

Some systems allow hot node scaling-up, so a node can upgrade to adquire more computational resources without being removed and recreated.

``` yaml
h_reactive_hv_reactive:
    desired_cpu_utilization: 0.7
    h_time_period: 60
    h_node_utilization_threshold: 0.5
    h_replica_scale_down_stabilization_time: 300
    h_node_scale_down_stabilization_time: 600
    hv_time_period: 600
    hv_algorithm: fcma
    hv_transition_time_budget: 100
    hot_node_scale_up: False
```

_h_reactive_hv_reactive_ autoscaler corresponds to the M-HA-RHUA, i.e., a combination of a reactive horizontal autoscaler and a reactive history unaware autoscaler. It basically performs as a reactive horizontal autoscaler that is readjusted every _hv_time_period_ seconds by a reactive history unaware autoscaler, moving the deployment to a near-optimal one.

``` yaml
h_reactive_hv_predictive:
    h_desired_cpu_utilization: 0.7
    h_time_period: 60 
    h_node_utilization_threshold: 0.5 
    h_replica_scale_down_stabilization_time: 300
    h_node_scale_down_stabilization_time: 600
    hv_prediction_window: 600
    hv_prediction_percentile: 95
    hv_algorithm: fcma 
    hv_transition_time_budget: 100 
    hot_node_scale_up: False
```

_h_reactive_hv_predictive_ autoscaler corresponds to the M-HA-PHUA, i.e., a combination of a reactive horizontal autoscaler and a predictive history unaware autoscaler. It basically performs as a reactive horizontal autoscaler that is readjusted every _hv_time_period_ seconds by a predictive history unaware autoscaler, moving the deployment to a near-optimal one.

Finally, the autoscaler to be used must be set. For example:

``` yaml
autoscaler: h_reactive_hv_reactive
```

**2. Timings.**
This section defines the timings in seconds related to node creation, node removals, container allocations and container removals.

``` yaml
timing_args:
  node_time_to_billing: 20
  node_creation_time: 100
  node_removal_time: 10
  container_creation_time: 1 
  container_removal_time: 5 
  hot_node_scale_up_time: 60
```
Property _node_time_to_billing_ is the time between the request of a new node creation and the time the node starts to be billed. Between _node_time_to_billing_ and _node_creation_time_ the node can not allocate containers yet, but it is billed.
Finally, _hot_node_scale_up_time_ is the time required to perform a node upgrade.

**3. Applications.**

This section in the YAML file defines the applications.

```yaml
apps:
  app0:
    load:
      file: ../../traces/triangle_rand.csv
      time_interval: 1
      repeat: 1
      load_offset: 10
      load_mult: 4
      time_offset: 0
    container:
      cpu: 260 mcores
      mem: 0.420 GiB
      perf: 1 req/s
      aggs: [1, 2, 4]
```
The application workload is based on a trace file in csv format, with a column per application, 
where a line corresponds to a sample of integer workloads. The other properties preprocess the 
trace. _time_interval_ is the time in seconds between two consecutive samples. The whole number 
of samples is repeated _repeat_ times. For example, we can repeat one hour of samples to obtain 
the trace for several hours. Workloads can be incremented using an integer _load_offset_ 
and multiplied by a float _load_mult_. Finally, the first sample of the workload is repeated 
_time_ofset_ times adding some offset to the final workloads.

Each application is implemented as a set of containers, with allocated cores, memory and 
associated performance. Three different types of containers, or container classes, are defined 
for _app0_ in the example. _cpu_, _mem_ and _perf_ data in the YAML file correspond to the 
minimum-size container, with aggregation level 1. The other container classes correspond to 
aggregation levels 2 and 4, have x2 nd x4 cores and performance, but memory is assumed to be 
the same. The value 1/_perf represents the minimum inter-arrival time required for the minimum-sized
container to meet the application's timing requirements.

**4. Simulation time.**
The simulation time is defined in this section.

``` yaml
simulation_time: 3600
```
If the number of seconds in the workload is longer than this time, workload is truncated at the end. However, if the number of seconds in the workload is to small, the last sample is repeated to get the simulation time.